Add:  dependency page to guide (#106)
pyOpenSci/python-package-guide: package-structure-code/declare-dependencies.md

> # Python package dependency declaration

Reviewer: The title of this page would make me come here to find out how to declare install dependencies, but that is not actually covered (entirely different `project.dependencies` table). Is there somewhere else in the guide we can link to show that as well?

Author: great question - i actually did just add a section on that [at the top](https://output.circle-artifacts.com/output/job/6a2d033e-06eb-4710-bb12-538a0bb200d6/artifacts/0/html/package-structure-code/declare-dependencies.html) following this comment! we also show that in the [previous page that covers pyproject.toml files](https://output.circle-artifacts.com/output/job/6a2d033e-06eb-4710-bb12-538a0bb200d6/artifacts/0/html/package-structure-code/pyproject-toml-python-package-metadata.html)

have a look at the built pages and let me know if this configuration makes sense. looking at the pyproject.toml page after working with folks in our slack on moving from setup.py to pyproject also has been wondering if that page needs to have a bit more info. i have a tutorial on this topic in google docs but i'm curious what you think about what we have now and whether it's clear.

Author: perfect - i'll resolve this comment for now!

```

To declare dependencies in your **pyproject.toml** file:

1. Add a [optional.dependencies] table to your **pyproject.toml** file.
2. Create named groups of dependencies using the syntax:

`group-name = ["dep1", "dep2"]`

```{tip}

If you have dependencies that need to be installed
directly from github using a  `git+https` installation
approach then you may still need to use a requirements.txt or a conda environment file for your dependency installs.

```

Below we've created 3 sets of optional dependencies named: tests, docs and lint:

```toml
[project.optional-dependencies]
tests = [
  "pytest",
  "pytest-cov"
]
docs = ["sphinx", "pydata_sphinx_theme"]
lint = [
  "black",
  "flake8"
]

```

[Learn more: View PyPA's overview of declaring optional dependencies](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/declaring-project-metadata/#dependencies-optional-dependencies)

## How to install dependencies from your pyproject.toml

You can then install the dependencies via individual groups using:

> `pip install yourPackage.[docs]`

Reviewer: `yourPackage.` is not a valid target name. It can be `yourPackage` or `.` but the `.` makes more sense here as the proper name usually won't install from local disk.

Author: great point. i fixed this. i think i actually got confused by some of the documentation around this. i've removed yourPackage throughout (i hope) in the last commit. thanks!

i still have a question however. 

i was playing around with gemgis and below - doesn't work

```
[project.optional-dependencies]
build = ["twine", "build"]
deps = ["stravalib"]
dev = [".[build,deps]"]
```

but this does:

```
[project.optional-dependencies]
build = ["twine", "build"]
deps = ["stravalib"]
dev = ["gemgis.[build,deps]"]
```

and i'm not sure if this is still my not fully understanding all of the nuances of extras in the pyproj file OR you have to declare the project name for grouped extras (i hope that makes sense?)

Reviewer: I'm not sure why one of your examples works but the other does not. If I try either in a test project I get errors for both about a dependency not following PEE-508. I think, but didn't look into it too far, this doesn't work because `.` is an illegal package name, but some nicity for pip to specify the local project, but that's not legal in a pyproject.

Author: oh neither work for you? I wonder if it's because i have gemgis already installed in that environment?

Below doesn't work for me either locally:
```
[project.optional-dependencies]
build = ["twine", "build"]
deps = ["stravalib"]
dev = ["[build,deps]"]
```

i don't know how to actually group dependency-groups into a new group at this point if neither work for you and only gemgis.[group1, group2] work for me.

i get a value error otherwise

```
ValueError: invalid pyproject.toml config: `project.optional-dependencies.dev[0]`.
      configuration error: `project.optional-dependencies.dev[0]` must be pep508
```

Author: actually [here](https://hynek.me/articles/python-recursive-optional-dependencies/), they suggest this: 

```
[project]
name = "my-pkg"

[project.optional-dependencies]
tests = ["pytest"]
docs = ["sphinx"]
dev = [
    "my-pkg[tests,docs]",
    "pdbpp",
]
```

Reviewer: That looks good. After getting the PEP508 errors I assumed you had to use the published name of the package.

Reviewer 2: I had no idea that you could reference other `optional-dependency` recipes from within. Neat!

Reviewer: It's not really like a local reference. You are telling pip that installing `my-pkg[dev]` depends on `my-pkg[tests]` to be installed, same as `pdbpp`; it initially looks like any other external dependency. It's only when dependencies have been solved that it figures out that the dependencies under `[dev]` and `[tests]` are different, and merges those graphs. And because you have to have exactly one version of any package in an environment, the `my-pkg` in `my-pkg[tests]` must be the same version as that in `my-pkg[dev]`.

Author: ok resolving this! as i have made the change and pushed it here!

or you could install just the dependencies for your tests using:

> `pip install yourPackage.[tests]`

Reviewer: I would rather see these examples as all `python -m pip install ...` (actually every pip example anywhere. I would prefer this to be a style rule for the entire guide)

Reviewer: Running pip as a callable module rather than a stand alone command can reduce a lot of issues and confusion on the part of the user. There is nothing about the lookup of the pip command that guarantees it is installed for (and so installs other packages for) the python interpreter that is also resolved as a command. This means that when the pip and python commands get out of sync (and they always seem to eventually when you are least on guard) then pip acts on an environment unrelated to where you are actually running code.

There can be other reason to use pip this way too, many have been written about elsewhere as well https://snarky.ca/why-you-should-use-python-m-pip/

Author: ok i really would love folks to chime in on this so i / we can understand and agree on what best practice should be here. i would love to understand why this would be a better approach. my understanding is that similar to how build operates, this would run pip as a module? which maybe means it would run from the current active environment? i'm guessing here... and welcome clarification!

Reviewer: yes, precisely. This way always runs pip as a module, meaning you select the python you want to install for, not the pip that is associated with the python you want to install for. And in virtual environments this always picks up the project python. (It can pick up the project pip too, but not always! Virtualenvs don't always have a pip so you might break out and use a system pip).

Author: ok i'm convinced between this conversation and feedback in our slack! 

1. i will fix all examples to use `python -m pip` and have a small breakout with a link to [brett's blog post ](https://snarky.ca/why-you-should-use-python-m-pip/) about why this is better.

Question for your both here. @Zeitsperre , you mention above that there might be differences between mac/windows/linux. Is that explicelty with using `python3 -m pip`  ? so we can presume that `python -m pip` (without the "3") should work universally across operating systems? or do we have a warning tip related to cross operating system implementations?

2. Trevor - i'm trying to follow the second part of your statement above. it sounds like it would be good to have a breakout tip about linux distributions but i don't fully understand what it would look like or how someone would encounter a mixed environment with both pip installed dependencies AND linux libraries already installed. Would this happen perhaps in a case where python shipped with someone's linux install and had existing packages and a user doesn't use some sort of virtual environment?

if you can help me understand or perhaps write a short blurb i can make a note of this. And it might be the the high level take away is always use virtual environments be it venv, conda etc. 

thank you both! this is super helpful feedback!

Reviewer: Unfortunately true @Zeitsperre. There is no universal way to call python that will always work in every situation. Python from python.org only ships `python3` and `python3.X` commands for Linux and Mac, but only a `python` for Windows. Meanwhile virtualenvs redirect the `python` command for all platforms. And if you build python yourself you might only have a `python3.X` command for that version. This is all very confusing and why we have an assortment of python runners in the community. IMO it is too confusing and off-topic to get slotted into documentation about project dependencies.

But this is why **not** using `pip` is better. If you get an error "python: command not found" you can probably figure out what the correct name is. But in that same situation `pip` might exist and point to the wrong python environment.

Reviewer 2: > Question for your both here. @Zeitsperre , you mention above that there might be differences between mac/windows/linux. Is that explicelty with using `python3 -m pip` ? so we can presume that `python -m pip` (without the "3") should work universally across operating systems? or do we have a warning tip related to cross operating system implementations?

Echoing Jeremy here, that since `$ python` isn't always the naming convention depending on your environment, it might make sense to have some warning about that trip-fall early on. Maybe something about ensuring that your environment is activated (definitely the case for `virtualenv` and `conda`)?

> I'm trying to follow the second part of your statement above. it sounds like it would be good to have a breakout tip about linux distributions but i don't fully understand what it would look like or how someone would encounter a mixed environment with both pip installed dependencies AND linux libraries already installed. Would this happen perhaps in a case where python shipped with someone's linux install and had existing packages and a user doesn't use some sort of virtual environment?

Thankfully, most Linux environments emit a bunch of warnings if you as a user start trying to install `pip` libraries into your system Python installation. I can see this happening if a user comes across some bad advice that suggests running ~`$ sudo pip install xyz`~ (strikethrough since you should never run this command).

The "bad stuff" that could happen could be that a systemd/runit service depends on a particular version of `pyyaml` in order to parse a configuration file to properly run. Perhaps this service is tied to your fan control curves, or to the hardware temperature sensors, or something else that interfaces with hardware. This service could fail to start and worse, it could cause actual damage to the hardware. Alternatively, if the Python library is in any way tied to package binary compilations, it could render your system unable to compile libraries and effectively break your installation. Either way, not good.

> if you can help me understand or perhaps write a short blurb i can make a note of this. And it might be the the high level take away is always use virtual environments be it venv, conda etc.

Essentially, you're absolutely right about the take-away; You should always be using virtualenv (or conda) unless you're working on a system-level package (i.e.: something that would be installed via `apt` (Debian) or `dnf` (Fedora) or `xbps-install` (Void Linux), etc.). Let me know if you'd like a blurb and I'll see what I can offer!

Author: ok friends.

1. i've updated every instance of pip on this page to `python -m pip` NOTE - there are likely other instances in our guide - but i don't want to fix this everywhere in this pr to keep the scope tight. Maybe we can go through the guide and fix all other instances in another pr? 
<img width="854" alt="Screenshot 2023-12-05 at 6 41 49 PM" src="https://github.com/pyOpenSci/python-package-guide/assets/7649194/72391691-66d7-43e0-8b7e-12c2509a85b3">

2. i've added the above breakout  to explain why we did this. i'll push the fixes soon in case you want to copy edit or rewrite my brief summary of the above discussion. or just let me know if i missed something critical!

Author: i just am reviewing comments and noticed that i missed the - be sure to activate your dev envt first. so i added that to the breakout box as well!

Author: also @sneakers-the-rat thank you for the kind words. i definitely can't do everything!! and i'm super grateful to everyone here helping ensure the content in this guide is accurate AND (beginner) user-friendly! 

 i have moved everything over to `python -m pip install`. one thing we could do is see how users respond to this. if we get a lot of questions / confusion we can  modify as needed too. this is a living document after all. 

i am going to resolve this comment for the time being BUT welcome re-opening it if we need to / if y'all aren't ok with edits ive made to the page at any time!

You can install all dependencies in the `[optional.dependencies]` table using:

> `yourPackage.[all]`

Reviewer: This is not a valid target. The example pyproject.toml above could include an additional `all` table that references the other optional-dependencies, or the multi extras syntax could be used here (`.[tests,docs,lint]`)

Author: i learned that the hard way. what is really odd - is that i got this from some nox example. and somehow it worked for me locally. but it must have been by mistake (i really don't know how it could have worked after testing this). i've removed and fixed as you suggested here.

````

## How to declare development dependencies

To declare dependencies in your **pyproject.toml** file:

1. Add a [optional.dependencies] table to your **pyproject.toml** file.
2. Create named groups of dependencies using the syntax:

`group-name = ["dep1", "dep2"]`

```{tip}

If you have dependencies that need to be installed
directly from github using a  `git+https` installation
approach then you may still need to use a requirements.txt or a conda environment file for your dependency installs.

```

Below we've created 3 sets of optional dependencies named: tests, docs and lint:

```toml
[project.optional-dependencies]
tests = [
  "pytest",
  "pytest-cov"
]
docs = ["sphinx", "pydata_sphinx_theme"]
lint = [
  "black",
  "flake8"
]

```

[Learn more: View PyPA's overview of declaring optional dependencies](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/declaring-project-metadata/#dependencies-optional-dependencies)

## How to install dependencies from your pyproject.toml

You can install development dependencies using the
groups that you defined above using the syntax:

> `pip install .[docs]`

Reviewer 3: Nitpick: I recently stumbled upon a shell issue... Mac ships `zsh` as default shell and
```
pip install .[docs]
```
fails on `zsh`. Double quotes are needed for the interpreter to understand the command:
```
pip install ."[docs]"
```
This has the advantage of working on `bash` and the other *ix shells (not tested on PowerShell).

Author: i'll fix this and leave a comment. are there any instances where the quotes might break things for users? @cmarmo @ucodery @Zeitsperre ? if so we should provide a breakout about this as well.

Author: Actually i just saw we added this breakout. Is it better to use the quotes throughout and tell users in some cases they may not need them? or is it better to remove the quotes and tell users to add them if needed? 

<img width="866" alt="Screenshot 2023-12-05 at 6 44 56 PM" src="https://github.com/pyOpenSci/python-package-guide/assets/7649194/bb6fec45-9153-4d48-bcd0-86523ffd6780">

Author: ok so my goal today is to get this PR merged. BUT if we decide on another approach to the quotes we can ALWAYS open a new pr. here is where i am with this

* we are using double quotes throughout the guide as based upon @ucodery analysis of various shells, that seems to be something that works in most (but not all shells)
* I do have a breakout about the quotes and zsh users where i talk about single vs double quotes - it is below:
<img width="839" alt="Screenshot 2023-12-15 at 11 24 19 AM" src="https://github.com/pyOpenSci/python-package-guide/assets/7649194/a534aef8-33a3-4794-aa5e-a53ccf8ca4bf">

Where i am with this
1. it occured to me that MANY MANY beginner users will have no idea what zsh is. honestly bash / shell is a really confusing topic to MANY scientists and even getting them started on windows with something like gitBash was something we'd really have to walk people through. So we may want to think about a bit more information around bash even if it's a separate lesson. i'm going to open a issue with this same language where we can discuss -  but wanted to mention that here. 
2. @sneakers-the-rat some people may be interested in .zshrc customization as you highlighted below. i didn't know that was possible. i wonder if that could be added to a page on setting up shell and being aware of what type of shell you are using -  somewhere 

i know that this topic will be a potential stumbling block for a subset of our users.

Author: ok [issue opened here](https://github.com/pyOpenSci/python-package-guide/issues/134). 

i'll resolve this thread for now but we can revisit after gaining a better understanding of guidance community folks might need around various shell options.

# Declaring Development Dependencies - Python Packaging

## How to declare documentation, test, and other dependencies

In the [pyproject.toml overview page](pyproject-toml-python-package-metadata),
we discussed how to set up a **pyproject.toml** file with basic metadata
information. On this page, you will learn about storing and accessing dependency
information within the pyproject.toml file.

It is recommended that you store all dependency information in a pyproject.toml file
(with a few caveats).

This ensures that all of the metadata associated with your package is declared
in a single place, making it simpler for users and contributors to understand

> your package infrastructure.

Author: it is. honestly i haven't even thought about that - good point!! this was setup a year+ ago and i never even thought about it!

 can you use a pyproject.toml for a sphinx book / site? i guess you could and just update the noxfile instructions for installing deps? prs are always welcome!!

> your package infrastructure.

Reviewer 4: you definitely can! either make a dummy package with just an `__init__` file or else with poetry i install it with `--no-root` (but i don't think it really matters i was mostly joking)

## Direct project dependencies

Your core project dependencies - representing the packages that

> a user requires to install your package, can be stored in a

Author: fixed!! thanks!

dependencies array located within the `[project]` table of your
pyproject.toml file. This looks something like this:

```toml
[project]
name = "examplePy"
authors = [
    {name = "Some Maintainer", email = "some-email@pyopensci.org"},
]
# more metadata here...
dependencies = [
    "rioxarray",
    "geopandas",
]
```

> ## Development dependencies

Author: ahhhh i see what you mean. i'll rename it to be Optional Dependencies!

> Dependencies for building your documentation, running your tests and building your package's distribution files are often referred to as development dependencies. These are the dependencies that a user needs to run core development elements of your package such as:

Author: great point! i've added this

*******
Ideally, you should only list the packages that are 
necessary to install and use your package in the `[dependencies]` section. This minimized the number of additional packages that both your users and packages that depend upon your package have to install. 

Remember that fewer dependencies to install reduces the likelihood of version mismatches in user environments.

* running your test suite
* building your documentation
* linting and other code cleanup tools

These dependencies can be stored in an
`[optional.dependencies]` table within the **pyproject.toml** file.

> 

Author: fixed!
*****

It's important to note that within the `optional.dependencies` table, you can store additional, optional dependencies within named sub-groups. This is a different table than the dependencies section discussed above which contains a single array with a single list of required packages.

:::{admonition} What happened to the requirements.txt file for dependencies?
:class: note

> The requirements.txt file used to be the default way to store dependencies. However in recent years, the ecosystem has moved to storing all of this information in a single **pyproject.toml** file. You may find that some projects do still maintain a requirements.txt file either for specific local development needs OR to support users who may want to create a pip-based virtual environment.

Author: i hear you! moved to the top!!

> The requirements.txt file used to be the default way to store dependencies. However in recent years, the ecosystem has moved to storing all of this information in a single **pyproject.toml** file. You may find that some projects do still maintain a requirements.txt file either for specific local development needs OR to support users who may want to create a pip-based virtual environment.

Author: i hear you... 
****
😆 
now that i read that i think my head was stuck because i was helping someone at the time that had both conda yml files and requirements.txt.
i didn't fully understand optional.dependencies at the time.

SO i've changed the block to this text which i think is more accurate!! great catch!

*****
The `requirements.txt` file used to be the default way to store dependencies. However in recent years, the ecosystem has moved to storing all of this information in a single **pyproject.toml** file. Some projects still maintain a `requirements.txt` file either for specific local development needs.

:::

## How to declare development dependencies

To declare dependencies in your **pyproject.toml** file:

1. Add a [optional.dependencies] table to your **pyproject.toml** file.
2. Create named groups of dependencies using the syntax:

`group-name = ["dep1", "dep2"]`

```{admonition} Installing packages from GitHub / Gitlab
:class: tip

If you have dependencies that need to be installed
directly from github using a `git+https` installation

> approach then you may still need to use a requirements.txt or a conda environment file for your dependency installs.

Reviewer 2: This is true, but if you have special build recipes that depend on projects in development (`main|master` branches) this won't work. When bundling source packages, I'll add a "requirements_upstream.txt` with these listed, but not list them in the `pyproject.toml`, but rather have them installed in a Makefile recipe (e.g. `$ make upstream-dev`).

> approach then you may still need to use a requirements.txt or a conda environment file for your dependency installs.

Author: that's a great and simple comment that i think users will understand in the case they have github hosted deps! thank you @Zeitsperre !!

> approach then you may still need to use a requirements.txt or a conda environment file for your dependency installs.

Author: ok i now have this in the breakout!!

```
:::{admonition} Installing packages from GitHub / Gitlab
:class: tip

If you have dependencies that need to be installed directly from GitHub using 
a `git+https` installation approach, you can do so using the pyproject.toml 
file like so:

```toml
dependencies = [
"my_dependency >= 1.0.1 @ git+https://git.server.example.com/mydependency.git"
]
```

IMPORTANT: For security reasons, if your library depends on a GitHub-hosted 
project, you will need to point to a specific commit/tag of that repository in 
order to upload your project to PyPI
:::
```

i think one of my favorite parts of working on these pages is that i'm learning a lot! for whatever reason i had it in my brain that you couldn't install from github in a pyproject.toml dep section! of course my brain was wrong as usual! :) thank you all!!

> approach then you may still need to use a requirements.txt or a conda environment file for your dependency installs.

Reviewer 4: ya i thought i had mentioned this in this or another comment but the downside is basically git dependencies are a no-go on PyPI as @Zeitsperre says. I didn't even know that you were allowed to point to a specific commit hash in a PyPI package. 

For the sake of completeness of the example, the syntax for specifying a commit is this:

```
"my_dependency >= 1.0.1 @ git+https://git.server.example.com/mydependency.git@GITREF"
```

pip gives these examples ( https://pip.pypa.io/en/latest/topics/vcs-support/#vcs-support ) 

```
MyProject @ git+https://git.example.com/MyProject.git@master
MyProject @ git+https://git.example.com/MyProject.git@v1.0
MyProject @ git+https://git.example.com/MyProject.git@da39a3ee5e6b4b0d3255bfef95601890afd80709
MyProject @ git+https://git.example.com/MyProject.git@refs/pull/123/head
```

so ya u can use any git ref *in the project dependencies* but only IG specific commit hashes/tags are allowed *on PyPI* 

abstractly

```
<pkg_name> <version_specifier> @ <protocol>+<url>@<ref>
```

and i assume the behavior there would be for pypi to clone the given repo at the specific ref and then try and check it against the version specifier after cloning, as pip loves to do. I wonder if you specify the ref as a branch if it walks backwards through commits until it finds a matching one? i literally love watching pip do that, very comical

```

Below we've created 3 sets of optional dependencies named: tests, docs and lint:

```toml
[project.optional-dependencies]
tests = [
  "pytest",
  "pytest-cov"
]
docs = ["sphinx", "pydata_sphinx_theme"]
lint = [
  "black",
  "flake8"
]

```

> [Learn more: View PyPA's overview of declaring optional dependencies](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/declaring-project-metadata/#dependencies-optional-dependencies)

Author: weird @sneakers-the-rat it works for me. could you try again please?

## How to install dependencies from your pyproject.toml

:::{admonition} Using `python -m pip`

In all of the examples in this guide, you will notice we are calling
`pip` using the syntax:

`python -m pip`

Calling pip using `python -m` ensures that the pip that you are using to install your package comes from your current active Python
environment. We strongly suggest that you use this approach whenever
you call `pip` to avoid installation conflicts.
:::

You can install development dependencies using the
groups that you defined above using the syntax:

`python -m pip install .[docs]`

Above you install the dependencies needed for your documentation and also your package using pip. Below you

> install just the dependencies needed to run your tests:

Author: fixed!!

`python -m pip install .[tests]`

You can install all dependencies in the `[optional.dependencies]` table using:

`python -m pip install .[docs, tests, lint]`

> 

Author: totally- great catch! fixed locally!

Each time you call `python -m pip install .[groups-here]`, you are also installing your package locally and also any dependencies

> that your package needs / has declared in your pyproject.toml file.

Author: i do - fixed!

```{admonition} For zsh shell users
:class: tip

Some versions of shell don't support the square bracket syntax. In those cases you will need to add
quotes to your install call like this:

`python -m pip install 'yourPackage.[tests]'`

```

### Combining sets of dependencies

Above we reviewed how to install dependencies from your pyproject toml. In some cases you may want to group sets of dependencies like so:

```toml
[project.optional-dependencies]
tests = ["pytest", "pytest-cov"]
docs = ["sphinx", "pydata_sphinx_theme"]
dev = [
    "packageName[tests, docs]",
    "build",
    "twine"
]
```

The above allows you to install both the tests and docs dependency lists
using the command:

`python -m pip install .[dev]`

```{tip}
When you install dependencies using the above syntax:

`python -m pip install .[tests, docs]`

pip will also install both your package and its core dependencies.
```

## Where does conda fit in ?

> The above workflow assumes that you want to publish your package on PyPI. And then you plan to publish to conda-forge (optionally), [by submitting a recipe using greyskull](https://www.pyopensci.org/python-package-guide/package-structure-code/publish-python-package-pypi-conda.html).

Author: in the meantime i've renamed the next section.

> The above workflow assumes that you want to publish your package on PyPI. And then you plan to publish to conda-forge (optionally), [by submitting a recipe using greyskull](https://www.pyopensci.org/python-package-guide/package-structure-code/publish-python-package-pypi-conda.html).

Reviewer 4: agreed. same thought as here: https://github.com/pyOpenSci/python-package-guide/pull/106#discussion_r1418439337

put conda on its own page, just allude to it here <3

> If you want to support conda users, you may want to also maintain a conda environment that they can use to install your package. Maintaining a conda environment will also help you test that your package installs as you expect into a conda environment.

Author: so looking at this further i'm not sure if we want the conda info above here. in my mind, this section was more for contributors who might use conda environments and are less aware of venv, etc.  i'll keep this open but it feels a like a bit too much for this specific page.

> If you want to support conda users, you may want to also maintain a conda environment that they can use to install your package. Maintaining a conda environment will also help you test that your package installs as you expect into a conda environment.

Author: that is a great idea. i do think it's important information!!

> ## Read the Docs & project dependencies

Author: much better!! fixed!

If you are using readthedocs to build your documentation, then you may need to install your dependencies using a **readthedocs.yaml** file.

Below is an example of installing the **docs** section of your dependency table in the pyproject.toml file within a readthedocs.yaml file.

```yaml
python:
  install:
    - method: pip
      path: .
      extra_requirements:
        - docs # you can add any of the subgroups of dependencies from your pyproject.toml file to this list.
```

```{tip}

[Learn more about creating a readthedocs.yaml file here. ](https://docs.readthedocs.io/en/stable/config-file/index.html)
```

## If you are using a front-end build tool like PDM, Hatch or Poetry

The above should work if you are using a vanilla packaging approach with a tool such as the [PyPA build tool](https://pypa-build.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) and any back-end that works with `build`.

> If you are using another front-end build tool such as PDM, Hatch or Poetry to manage dependencies, then your approach to installing dependencies may be different. Each tool has its own, slightly different way of declaring dependencies in the **pyproject.toml** file. You can learn more about [configuring RTD for tools such as Poetry and PDM here.](https://docs.readthedocs.io/en/stable/build-customization.html#install-dependencies-with-poetry)

Author: ok i revisited this and realized this came up when i was working with someone and trying to get deps to install on RTD. so it's not about installing rather RTD has some specific instructions for other tools to be aware of. SO

1. i created a small breakout about other tools and RTD 
2. simplied the text to just say - if you are using another tool , be sure to check the RTD documentation - then i linked to it. 
i hope that is better / easier now to follow!

```{admonition} A note for conda users
:class: tip

If you use a conda environment for developing your tool, keep in mind that when you install your package using `pip install -e .` (or using pip in general), dependencies will be installed from PyPI rather than conda.

Thus, if you are running a conda environment, installing your package in editable mode risks dependency conflicts. This is particularly important if you have a spatial package that required GDAL or has a GDAL supported dependency.

> Alternatively, you can install your package using `pip install -e . --no-deps` to only install the package. And install the rest of your dependencies using a conda environment file.

Author: fixed!!

# Python Package Dependencies

:::{admonition} What happened to the requirements.txt file for dependencies?
:class: note

> The `requirements.txt` file used to be the default way to store dependencies. However in recent years, the ecosystem has moved to storing all of this information in a single **pyproject.toml** file. Some projects still maintain a `requirements.txt` file either for specific local development needs.

Reviewer: Was there another side to that "either"?
Also, is this Admonition _too_ soon? It seems jarring to have a detour before the first line of this guide; maybe right after the opening section.

Author: agreed. @ucodery i just reorganized the top of the page - have a look at the newest version. i lead now with "what is a dependency" THEN there are different types of dependencies - optional / development and required... 
then i left space for @sneakers-the-rat to add more about how to specify dep versions in a TODO (which will be a later PR). 

see what you think about the new intro. i think it's much more user friendly but i bet the text could use other sets of eyes beyond mine.

:::

## Declaring different types of dependencies

In the [pyproject.toml overview page](pyproject-toml-python-package-metadata),
we discussed how to set up a **pyproject.toml** file with basic metadata
information. On this page, you will learn about storing and accessing dependency
information within the pyproject.toml file.

It is recommended that you store all dependency information in a **pyproject.toml** file. This ensures that all of the metadata associated with your package is declared
in a single place, making it simpler for users and contributors to understand
your package infrastructure.

:::{admonition} Other ways you may see packages storing dependencies
:class: tip

If a project contains extensions written in other languages, you may need a `setup.py` file. Or you may contribute to a package that us using `setup.cfg` for dependency declaration.
[Learn more about this in the setuptools documentation](https://setuptools.pypa.io/en/latest/userguide/dependency_management.html#declaring-required-dependency)
:::

### Required dependencies

Your core project dependencies represent the packages that

> a user needs to install and use your package. Dependencies can be stored in a

Reviewer: This sentence sounds too active to me. The user doesn't need to take action or even know about the dependencies to use the package. Dependencies simply must be present in the environment for the project to run.

`dependencies` array located within the `[project]` table of your
**pyproject.toml** file. This looks something like this:

```toml
[project]
name = "examplePy"
authors = [
    {name = "Some Maintainer", email = "some-email@pyopensci.org"},
]

dependencies = [
    "rioxarray",
    "geopandas",
]
```

Ideally, you should only list the packages that are

> necessary to install and use your package in the `[dependencies]` section. This minimized the number of additional packages that both your users and packages that depend upon your package have to install.

Reviewer: Just to use. Dependencies are what are needed by the package while it is running. If there are installation dependencies, those would be specified in `build-system.requires`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
necessary to install and use your package in the `[dependencies]` section. This minimizes the number of additional packages that your users must install as well as the number of packages that depend upon your package must also install.
```

:::

### Install dependency groups

:::{admonition} Using `python -m pip`

In all of the examples in this guide, you will notice we are calling
`pip` using the syntax:

`python -m pip`

Calling pip using `python -m` ensures that the pip that you are using to install your package comes from your current active Python
environment. We strongly suggest that you use this approach whenever
you call `pip` to avoid installation conflicts.

To ensure this works as you want it to, activate your package's development
environment prior to installing anything using `pip`.
:::

You can install development dependencies using the
groups that you defined above using the syntax:

`python -m pip install ".[docs]"`

Above you install:
* dependencies needed for your documentation,
* required package dependencies in the `dependency` array and
* your package

using pip. Below you
install your package, required dependencies and optional test dependencies.

`python -m pip install ".[tests]"`

You can install multiple dependency groups in the `[optional.dependencies]` table using:

`python -m pip install ".[docs, tests, lint]"`

```{admonition} For zsh shell users
:class: tip

> Some versions of shell including all of the modern Macs that now use zsh shell, support the square bracket syntax. In those cases you will need to add

Reviewer: Can we just say "shells" instead of versions of shell? (and on the last line of the tip) These are totally different programs, different programming languages, in some cases sharing no common ancestry.

Also, IMO "support the square bracket syntax" makes it sound like zsh supports _pip_ using `[]` and it's the other shells that can't handle it.

Author: new text

> There are different shell applications that you and your package contributors might use.
> * zsh is the shell that comes with most Mac OS computer 
> * Windows users may use a tool such as git bash 
> 
> Many shells don't support the bracket `[tests]` syntax which is why we add 
> quotes to the command in this guide like this:
> 
> `python -m pip install ".[tests]"`
> 
> In some cases you may see syntax without the quotes in guidebooks or contributing 
> guides like the example below:
> 
> `python -m pip install yourPackage[tests]`
> 
> Calling yourPackage[tests] without the double quotes will work on some shells but not all.

quotes to your install call like this:

`python -m pip install ".[tests]"`

In some cases you may see syntax like this:

`python -m pip install yourPackage[tests]`

in documentation. This will work on some versions of shell but not all.

```

### Combining sets of dependencies

> Above we reviewed how to install dependencies from your pyproject toml. In some cases you may want to group sets of dependencies like so:

Reviewer: s/pyproject toml/pyproject.toml/

Reviewer: AH, I forget all the time you can now do this in github. All these fancy cloud features 😃

Author: right? so many fancy cloud features. it's no worry i just didn't want you to feel like you couldn't make corrections if you want to. comments are find but inline corrections are always welcome! :)

```toml
[project.optional-dependencies]
tests = ["pytest", "pytest-cov"]
docs = ["sphinx", "pydata_sphinx_theme"]
dev = [
    "packageName[tests, docs]",
    "build",
    "twine"
]
```

The above allows you to install both the tests and docs dependency lists
using the command:

`python -m pip install ".[dev]"`

> ```{tip}

Reviewer: I think this is now covered by the earlier introduction.

When you install dependencies using the above syntax:

`python -m pip install ".[tests, docs]"`

`pip` will also install your package and its core dependencies.
```

:::{admonition} Where does conda fit in?
:class: note

The `pyproject.toml` file allows you to list any

> Python package published on PyPI (or on GitHub/ GitLab) as a dependency. Once create this file, declare dependencies, [build your package](python-package-distribution-files-sdist-wheel.md) and [publish your package to PyPI](publish-python-package-pypi-conda.md), people can install both your package and all of it's dependencies with one command.

Reviewer: s/Once/Once you/

Author: fixed!

> `pip install yourPackage`

Reviewer: `python -m pip` 😉

Author: good catch - fixed!

Alternatively, you can install your package using `pip install -e . --no-deps` to only install the package. And install the rest of your dependencies using a conda environment file.
```

## Dependencies in Read the Docs

Now that you have your dependencies specified in your project, you can use them to support other workflows such as publishing to Read the Docs.

Read the Docs is a documentation platform with a continuous integration / continuous deployment service that automatically builds and publishes your documentation.

If you are using Read the Docs to build your documentation, then you may need to install your dependencies using a **readthedocs.yaml** file.

Below is an example of installing the **docs** section of your dependency table in the pyproject.toml file within a readthedocs.yaml file.

```yaml
python:
  install:
    - method: pip
      path: .
      extra_requirements:
        - docs # you can add any of the subgroups of dependencies from your pyproject.toml file to this list.
```

:::{tip}
[Learn more about creating a `readthedocs.yaml` file here. ](https://docs.readthedocs.io/en/stable/config-file/index.html)
:::

> :::{admonition} Dependencies using other front-end build tool like PDM, Hatch or Poetry

Reviewer: It shouldn't be. The example you gave used pip to install the readthedocs dependencies. pip can install any PDM, Hatch, etc project, including any optional dependencies they specify. Even if specified in a metadata format other than `project.optional-dependencies`. (but not, I suppose, if they are specified as a type of environment and not an optional)

Author: you are right. i was confusing things, @ucodery i think what i noticed is that PDM, hatch poetry add dependencies to the pyproject.toml differently (hatch may not add them yet actually). but installation (with pip) could be similar. this is what i just don't know. poetry has it's own tables i think - can pip still install from them?

but i think a bigger takeaway for me here potentially is that we don't need to confuse our readers with the nuances of all of these tools here - they can read the docs. and we can link to the RTD docs for builds that use other tools such as poetry if users want to use those tools. hopefully the changes i've made make this all more clear and address your comments!!

# Python Package Dependencies

## What is a package dependency?

> A Python package dependency refers to an external package or

Author: comment here

> software that your Python project requires to function properly.

Author: another comment. once you are done - you have to finish your review!

These dependencies are considered optional, because they are not required to install and use your package.

Optional dependencies can be stored in an
`[optional.dependencies]` table in your **pyproject.toml** file.

It's important to note that within the `optional.dependencies` table, you can store additional, optional dependencies within named sub-groups. This is a different table than the dependencies section discussed above which contains a single array with a single list of required packages.

## Create optional dependency groups

To declare dependencies in your **pyproject.toml** file:

1. Add a `[optional.dependencies]` table to your **pyproject.toml** file.
2. Create named groups of dependencies using the syntax:

`group-name = ["dep1", "dep2"]`

:::{admonition} Installing packages from GitHub / Gitlab
:class: tip

If you have dependencies that need to be installed directly from GitHub using
a `git+https` installation approach, you can do so using the pyproject.toml
file like so:

```toml
dependencies = [
"my_dependency >= 1.0.1 @ git+https://git.server.example.com/mydependency.git"
]
```

IMPORTANT: For security reasons, if your library depends on a GitHub-hosted

> project, you will need to point to a specific commit/tag of that repository in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
project, you will need to point to a specific commit/tag/hash of that repository in
```

order to upload your project to PyPI
:::

> Below we've created 3 sets of optional dependencies named: tests, docs and lint:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Below we've created three sets of optional dependencies named: tests, docs and lint:
```

```toml
[project.optional-dependencies]
tests = [
  "pytest",
  "pytest-cov"
]
docs = ["sphinx", "pydata_sphinx_theme"]
lint = [
  "black",
  "flake8"
]

```
:::{admonition} Additional dependency resources

* [Learn more: View PyPA's overview of declaring optional dependencies](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/declaring-project-metadata/#dependencies-optional-dependencies)

* [Dependency specifiers](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/dependency-specifiers/)

:::

### Install dependency groups

:::{admonition} Using `python -m pip`

In all of the examples in this guide, you will notice we are calling
`pip` using the syntax:

`python -m pip`

> Calling pip using `python -m` ensures that the pip that you are using to install your package comes from your current active Python

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Calling pip using `python -m` ensures that the `pip` that you are using to install your package comes from your current active Python
```

environment. We strongly suggest that you use this approach whenever
you call `pip` to avoid installation conflicts.

To ensure this works as you want it to, activate your package's development
environment prior to installing anything using `pip`.
:::

You can install development dependencies using the
groups that you defined above using the syntax:

`python -m pip install ".[docs]"`

Above you install:

> * dependencies needed for your documentation,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* dependencies needed for your documentation (`docs`),
```

* required package dependencies in the `dependency` array and
* your package

using pip. Below you
install your package, required dependencies and optional test dependencies.

`python -m pip install ".[tests]"`

You can install multiple dependency groups in the `[optional.dependencies]` table using:

`python -m pip install ".[docs, tests, lint]"`

```{admonition} For zsh shell users
:class: tip

There are different shell applications that you and your package contributors might use.
* zsh is the shell that comes with most Mac OS computer
* Windows users may use a tool such as git bash

Many shells don't support the bracket `[tests]` syntax which is why we add
quotes to the command in this guide like this:

`python -m pip install ".[tests]"`

In some cases you may see syntax without the quotes in guidebooks or contributing
guides like the example below:

`python -m pip install yourPackage[tests]`

> Calling yourPackage[tests] without the double quotes will work on some shells but not all.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Calling yourPackage[tests] without the double quotes will work on some shells *but not all*.
```

This works great if your package is pure-python (no other languages used).

Some packages, particularly in the scientific Python ecosystem, require dependencies that are not written in Python. Conda was created to support distribution of tools that have code written in both Python and languages other than Python.
:::

## Support conda users with environment.yml files

The above workflow assumes that you want to publish your package on PyPI. And then you plan to publish to conda-forge (optionally), [by submitting a recipe using grayskull](https://www.pyopensci.org/python-package-guide/package-structure-code/publish-python-package-pypi-conda.html).

If you want to support conda users, you may want to also maintain a conda environment that they can use to install your package. Maintaining a conda environment will also help you test that your package installs as you expect into a conda environment.

```{admonition} A note for conda users
:class: tip

If you use a conda environment for developing your tool, keep in mind that when you install your package using `pip install -e .` (or using pip in general), dependencies will be installed from PyPI rather than conda.

> Thus, if you are running a conda environment, installing your package in editable mode risks dependency conflicts. This is particularly important if you have a spatial package that required GDAL or has a GDAL supported dependency.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thus, if you are running a conda environment, installing your package in "editable" mode risks dependency conflicts. This is particularly important if you have a spatial package that requires geospatial system libraries like GDAL or another system-level dependency.
```

Alternatively, you can install your package using `pip install -e . --no-deps` to only install the package. And install the rest of your dependencies using a conda environment file.
```

## Dependencies in Read the Docs

Now that you have your dependencies specified in your project, you can use them to support other workflows such as publishing to Read the Docs.

> Read the Docs is a documentation platform with a continuous integration / continuous deployment service that automatically builds and publishes your documentation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Read the Docs](https://readthedocs.org) is a documentation platform with a continuous integration / continuous deployment service that automatically builds and publishes your documentation.
```

software that your Python project:

1. needs to function properly.
2. requires if someone wants to develop / work on improving your package locally or
3. requires if a user wants to add additional functionality (that is not core) to your package

A dependency is not part of your project's codebase. It is a package or software that is called
within the code of your project or during development of your package.

### Understanding optional vs. required dependencies
You can think about dependencies as being either optional or required. If they are required, they will be listed in the `[dependency] =` table of your `pyproject.toml` file. If they are optional, they will be listed in the `[optional.dependencies]` table of your `pyproject.toml`.

You will learn about both below.

:::{figure-md} python-package-dependency-types

<img src="../images/python-package-dependency-types.png" alt="">

There are two broad groups of Python package dependencies: those that are optional and those that are required. Required packages are those that a user needs to use your package. Optional dependencies are packages a user can chose to install to add functionality to your package.

> Within those 2 groups, there are three use cases that you can think about. 1. Core dependencies are **required** for a user to use your package. 2. Development dependencies are optional and only needed if someone wants to work on your package locally. 3. Finally feature dependencies are optional and add additional functionality to your package. Not all packages will have feature dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within those two groups, there are three use cases that you can think about. 1. Core dependencies are **required** for a user to use your package. 2. Development dependencies are optional and only needed if someone wants to work on your package locally. 3. Finally feature dependencies are optional and add additional functionality to your package. Not all packages will have feature dependencies.
```

Remember that fewer dependencies to install reduces the likelihood of version mismatches in user environments.

:::{admonition} A dependency example

Let's pretend you have a package called `plotMe` that creates beautiful plots of data stored in `numpy` arrays. To create your plots in the `plotMe` package, you use the `seaborn` package to stylize our plots and also `numpy` to process array formatted data.

In the example above, the plotMe package, depends upon two packages:

* seaborn
* numpy

> This means that in order for plotMe to work in a users `environment` when installed, you also need to ensure that they have both of those required `dependencies` installed in their environment too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that in order for plotMe to work in a user's `environment` when installed, you also need to ensure that they have both of those required `dependencies` installed in their environment too.
```

> Declaring a dependency in your `pyproject.toml` file will ensure that it is listed as a required dependency when published to PyPI and that it is automatically installed by pip or conda into a users environment when they run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Declaring a dependency in your `pyproject.toml` file will ensure that it is listed as a required dependency when your package is published to PyPI and that a package manager (`pip` or `conda`) will automatically install it into a user's environment alongside your package:
```

### Install dependency groups

:::{figure-md} python-package-dependencies

<img src="../images/python-package-dependencies.png" alt="Diagram showing a ven diagram with three sections representing the dependency groups listed above - docs feature and tests. In the center it says your-package and lists the core dependencies of that package seaborn and numpy. To the right are two arrows. The first shows the command python - m pip install your-package. it them shows how installing your package that way installs only the package and the two core dependencies into a users environment. Below is a second arrow with python -m pip install youPackage[tests]. This leads to an environment with both the package dependencies - your-package, seaborn and numpy and also the tests dependencies including pytest and pytest-cov ">

> When a user installs your package locally using python -m pip install your-package only your package and it's core dependencies get installed. When they install your package `[tests]` pip will install both your package and its core dependencies plus any of the dependencies listed within the tests array of your `[optional.dependencies]` table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a user installs your package locally using `python -m pip install your-package` only your package and it's core dependencies get installed. When they install `your-package[tests]` pip will install both your package and its core dependencies plus any of the dependencies listed within the tests array of your `[optional.dependencies]` table.

```{admonition} For zsh shell users
:class: tip

There are different shell applications that you and your package contributors might use.

> * zsh is the shell that comes with most Mac OS computer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* zsh is the shell that comes by default on newer Mac OS computers
```

* Windows users may use a tool such as git bash

> Many shells don't support the bracket `[tests]` syntax which is why we add

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some shells don't support unquoted brackets (`[tests]`) which is why we add
```

quotes to the command in this guide like this:

`python -m pip install ".[tests]"`

> In some cases you may see syntax without the quotes in guidebooks or contributing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some cases you may see commands without the quotes in guidebooks or contributing
```
